---
layout: post
title:  "Release 1.2.0"
date:   2024-05-14 17:55:00 +0200
tags:   release
author: jvital2013
---

Uh oh, it looks like we got a little out-of-control again and changed... well, we changed a lot in SatDump. But never fear, this update contains a lot of great features that many of our users will appreciate - whether you are an amateur, or work in the professional space.

Please note, this is a major update from 1.1.4 - many internal systems have been reworked. Saved products might be arranged differently, and there are compatibility problems when mixing/matching versions of the SDR Server and SatDump GUI/CLI. As a general rule, it's a good idea to update all your systems to SatDump 1.2.0 at the same time.

Additionally, we've had some reports of issues updating to the latest build on Linux (self-built) and Windows (portable only). Windows Portable users should _not_ simply extract the .zip into their current program directory; instead, they should extract into a new directory, and copy the config folder over. Linux users should uninstall before pulling and re-building, or delete their `/usr/lib/satdump` folder and re-install.

# New Features

## Geostationary Satellite Products
TODO - Jamie/et al

## METEOR KMSS Support
TODO

## New projection system and GeoTIFF

As we said earlier, things changed. A lot. But why projections?

One feature that was being requested very often was the ability to export the data SatDump can generate into formats other software could work with, in order to use it in GIS programs and so on. Unfortunately, most standard file formats for this purpose are messy, to say the list and pretty much non-starters just due to their complexity and poor documentation. That is (somewhat) except GeoTIFF, which is at the very least *mostly* standard (though... PROJ likes to take liberties in writing custom strings that are NOT in the official standard). 

However, this raised a major problem : the projections implemented in SatDump until now were not exactly like the accepted "standard" used in most situations. This made writing/reading geotiffs and converting them to/from SatDump's formats very complicated, and it would have been a poor approach either way.

Therefore, rather all of SatDump's internals were re-wrote in order to match the usual standards, which made implementing GeoTIFF a whole lot easier. Hence now it is possible to export or import GeoTIFF by simple saving a Stereo/Equirectangular/UTM projection as .tif in the viewer.

[EXAMPLE OF THE MENU / EXAMPLE OF REPROJECTING EXTERNAL GEOTIFF]

This major rework initially for GeoTIFF also brought an initial "automatic" mode, where SatDump will automatically determine the projection required to cover whatever you are trying to re-project. (Do note this is still somewhat experimental, especially on Stereo)

[EXAMPLE OF AUTO PROJECTIONS]

Additionally, the projection layer system has also been changed in its operation. Before, each instrument could be "enabled" or "disabled" as a layer, but any changes to the composite would reflect in the projected layer instantly. This limited possible composites when it was about using the same instrument in different ways. 
Now, instead you can add the current state of a composite as a layer, which will be stored and *not* affected by further changes, even letting you add more than one.

[EXAMPLE OF NEW LAYERS]

Finally, a CLI tool is now available in order to reproduce anything you can achieve using the GUI. See the documentation for more information.

[CLI PROJECTION EXAMPLE / + COMMAND]

## Fill missing Lines
TODO - Jamie

## Orbcomm STX Plotter
TODO

## TODO: Other big features

## Added composites
Nearly every team member pitched in this time around to add many great new composites - and improvements to old ones.

- **AIRS HD:** Re-added a basic composite for the AIRS instrument.
- **KMSS:** Added CIR, NDVI, OSAVI, and Vegitation Classification composites.
- **MERSI-LL:** Added an AVHRR-equivalent 543b IR False Color composite.
- **MCIR, MCIR Rain, and MSA:** These composites have been equalized to prevent being too dull or too bright, resulting in a more appealing product each time.
- **VIIRS:** Cloud Type RGB, Cloud Phase RGB, Dust/Ash RGB, Snow RGB, and Fire Temperature RGB composites have been added.

## Other Features
Some minor features include:
- NOAA APT: Improved noise detection and auto-crop to reduce aggressively cropped images, and improve data reliability.
- NOAA APT: SatDump will now correct pass time errors within ~15 seconds to ensure proper map overlay/projection alignment.
- METEOR LRPT: Added GUI option to disable Reed-Solomon checks, to allow for imagery reception when the satellite transmits bad codes
- Inmarsat UDP packets now contain the SatDump version if the station id is set
- UDP Source has been renamed to Network Source. It can now accept samples over nng pub/sub as well
- The viewer "Load Dataset" and "Load Product" options have been merged into a single "Open" option
- Added support for METEOR M2-4
- Added support for RSP1B and RSPdx-R2
- Added easy-to-use DVB-S/S2 pipelines, which can be used to demodulate signals such as the upcoming HamTV module on the ISS.
- Added the ability to set a minimum elevation to start/stop processing or recording per satellite in autotrack
- Added/improved packet pipelines for IM-I, FORMOSAT 5/7, SAOCOM 1A/1B TLM, Queqiao-2, TODO

# Bugs fixes
SOME PUN ABOUT BUGS

## Performance Improvements
There was a big focus this time around on performance and memory optimization. Optimizations include, but are not limited to:

- Improve map overlay performance by almost 2x
- Improved LRPT decoder performance
- Reduced memory usage by nearly half when processing 8-bit imagery (GOES, KMSS, etc)
- 

## TODO: Other Big bugs

## Other smaller fixes
- METEOR LRPT: Fixed minor channel alignment bugs
- Fixed parameter conflicts with the `--port` flag in the CLI. If you used this flag anywhere, please verify the current usage with the docs.
- Fix DST bug with SatDump basebands
- Many performance/stability updates to DVB-S/S2 demodulation
- Fixed some minor USRP bugs
- Fixed bug where AMSU always saved as png
- Fixed many, many other crashes throughout the program
- Added Herobrine

## Wrapping up

As always, if you come across any bugs, feel free to [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/SatDump/SatDump/issues) or reach out to us on [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#satdump:altillimity.com)!

//UP TO: April 1, 2024